The Cosby Show was one of the most successful sitcoms of all time.
Premiering in 1984 and running for eight seasons, it spent five consecutive seasons as the number
one rated show in the United States.
The only other sitcom to do that was All on the Family in the 1970s, and not a single
sitcom has been able to do it since.
At its peak, The Cosby Show is being watched by over a third of all households in America.
Accredited with not only reviving the sitcom genre in the 1980s, The Cosby Show also broke
barriers by being a hit show that featured a black middle-class family.
It won six Emmys during its run, along with countless other awards and accolades.
Though the revelations surrounding Bill Cosby's predatory behavior cast a shadow on the series,
well before then, and certainly during its run, there was a deep critical contention
about what to make of The Cosby Show's vision of the world.
It was a show filled with black culture, but often passed on depicting the realities of
what it meant to be black in America in the 1980s.
The discussion around The Cosby Show is, in many ways, just as, or perhaps even more interesting
than the show itself, but before we dig into what this show means, we have to understand
what it was and the context in which it premiered.
And that will help us understand why it's so hard to know how to talk about The Cosby
Show.
The history of black Americans on television began with marginal roles, often as guest
performers, only making brief appearances.
It wasn't until the 1960s where we started seeing reoccurring roles for black actors,
albeit typically in bit parts, playing two stereotypes inspired by minstrel shows.
It was in this world William H. Cosby found himself when he began working as a stand-up
comedian, performing in San Francisco in the 1960s.
By 1963, he was on The Tonight Show, and he released his first stand-up LP titled Bill
Cosby is a Very Funny Fellow.
Right.
As a black comedian performing in the 1960s, Cosby's comedy style took a shape that would
reflect much of his work throughout his career.
While aware that he was performing to a predominantly white audience, he fashioned his comedy in
a way that would not upset them.
He described it in an interview with the CBC in 1963.
In 1965, Cosby's star kept rising as he landed a starring role in the television series
I Spy alongside Robert Culp, one of the earliest examples of a black actor starring in a drama
series.
Although a first-time actor, Cosby won three Emmys for his portrayal of Agent Alexander
Scott.
Around Bill Cosby, the civil rights movement of the 50s and 60s had started to make an
impact in the entertainment world.
Bill Cosby's strategy to address bigotry and racism was to create media that unpacked
the impact it had on children.
In 1968, he presented a film titled Black History, Lost, Stolen, or Strayed.
Now, if you tell the history of slavery right, you've got a big problem on your hands.
The slave trader didn't take some savage out of Africa.
He took a human being, sold him like an animal, and separated him from his family.
America invented the cruelest slavery in the history of them, since it broke up black
families.
After slavery was over, America kept breaking up the black man's family.
And that's some awful history to teach.
Fifty years later, and parts of this film still speak very powerfully, Cosby would continue
to define his comedy and how it reflects upon race, always cognizant of the audience watching
him and the limitations he believed that created.
In the 1970s, we began to see a greater number of shows with predominantly black casts, such
as The Jeffersons, Sanford and Son, and Good Times.
Those that not only highlighted black characters, but gave them a wider range of experiences
and stories than previously seen.
Of course, the 1970s weren't a haven of black representation on TV.
Stereotypes were abundant, with criminals and cop shows often being presented as black,
while black families were typically working class and rarely anything else.
Whereas many black actors found new opportunities on the sitcoms of the 1970s, Bill Cosby instead
starred in the short-lived The Bill Cosby Show, where Cosby played a phys-ed teacher.
It only ran for two seasons.
We spent much of the decade creating entertainment for our younger audience, such as Fat Albert
and the Cosby kids, and appearing on segments of The Electric Company.
He also returned to school, where he earned a doctorate of education from the University
of Massachusetts Amherst in 1977.
Cosby also spent the 1970s becoming a fixture in advertisements, particularly for Jello
and Coca-Cola, further cementing his family-friendly image.
As the 1970s ended, it was believed in Hollywood that sitcoms were becoming less popular with
audiences.
In 1983, only two sitcoms cracked the top 20 most-watched shows on television in the
United States.
As audiences for sitcoms declined, networks started placing a greater emphasis on appealing
to the majority white audience, and that often meant sitcoms starring a black cast, or episodes
touching on the issues of race, were to be avoided.
This was when TV producers Marcie Carsey and Tom Werner approached Bill Cosby about creating
a sitcom.
Though Cosby hadn't worked on a TV series for years, he had still been doing stand-up,
and that was the approach the producers took when speaking to him.
In his monologues, he was talking, as he always did, about the commonality of the human experience,
not the particular specific thing about being a black family with not enough money and not
enough resources in this world today.
So we were trying to bring him back to the premise of what had been his entire career,
which is the commonality, the universality of the human experience.
Cosby's original vision of the show was a working-class family, with himself as a
limo driver and his wife working in-home maintenance.
Due to the influence of the show's producers and Bill Cosby's wife Camille, the show's
premise was changed to make the show's lead couple, Cliff and Claire Huxtable, a doctor
and lawyer, respectively.
This approach was a perfect fit for the decade.
The 1980s marked a stark rise in conservatism in American media, and with that a strong
desire for issues such as race to be considered settled.
This was all under the mantra of colorblindness and the idea that racial discrimination was
over.
The Cosby Show would not be a show about a black family and the unique issues that impacted
black families, it would be about an American family, with the universal issues that supposedly
affected all American families.
In spite of its future success, initially the Cosby Show was a difficult sell to networks.
Comedies were considered dead after all, and the major networks, including NBC, all
passed on the series.
Eventually, NBC reconsidered though, and an order was made for several episodes.
And in 1984, the Cosby Show would go on to dominate television.
Even though the title of the series is The Cosby Show, Cosby didn't use his real name
for his TV family.
He played the role of Heath Cliff Huxtable, the family patriarch, easily identified by
his colorful sweaters and sage advice.
Much of the character and the family of Cliff Huxtable was based on Bill Cosby, with him
similarly having four daughters and one son, and many of his lines were ad-libbed on set,
which had the effect of blending the actor and character together.
His playful attitude with children and unflinching ability to set his kids on the right path
made him one of the most popular fathers in sitcom history.
Claire Huxtable was played by Felicia Rashad, the real force in The Huxtable Home.
Claire offered a strength and grace to hold the family together.
She managed to run a household while being a partner at her law firm, a woman who seemingly
had it all.
Rashad was an accomplished stage actress and is credited for keeping up with the energetic
performance of Cosby, and the pair's chemistry made the Huxtable parents seem like an almost
perfect match.
Lisa Bonet played Denise Huxtable, the second oldest in the family.
She grew from being a studious high school student into a free spirit, so much so that
her character almost seemed transformed by the end of her time on the show.
In the earlier seasons, she was the crush of many young teens watching at home.
Theodore Huxtable, or Theo for short, was played by Malcolm Jamal Warner, the middle
child and only boy.
Theo was often at odds with his parents, having trouble in school and generally making things
a mess for his family.
A less experienced actor than some of his castmates, Warner was chosen because Cosby
considered his performance to feel especially real.
Tempest Bloodsow played Vanessa Huxtable, the second youngest child in the Huxtable
home.
Eleven years old at the series' onset, she's a particularly bright student and even more
clever at finding out how to get things her own way.
Bloodsow's performance is especially impressive considering her age, revealing a real gift
for comedy.
The youngest child in the Huxtable home is Rudy, short for Rudith, played by Keisha Knight-Pulium.
Just painfully cute, Rudy grows considerably throughout the series, going from a darling
child of five to a strong-willed thirteen-year-old.
Originally Rudy was written to be a boy, and Knight-Pulium was only brought in because of
how cute she had appeared in a commercial.
The role came down to Knight-Pulium and a young Julia White, who had later gone to play
Steve Urkel on Family Matters, but the role eventually went to Knight-Pulium.
The last member to join the family in the first season was the oldest Huxtable child,
Sandra, played by Sabrina LaBeouf.
First appearing in episode 10 of the first season, LaBeouf would join the principal cast
in the show's second season.
In the first season, Sandra made a part of the family, albeit in ways that often left
her off-screen, pursuing her education at Princeton.
There's also a number of recurring guest stars on the show, such as Cliff's father
Russell, played by Earl Hyman, his mother Anna, played by Clarice Taylor, and Rudy's
friend Kenny, played by Dionne Richmond.
And the number of celebrity guest stars was enormous on the show, particularly black artists
such as Sammy Davis Jr., Stevie Wonder, and Bebe King.
The show made a concentrated effort to highlight a world where people of all cultures were
shown to be living in friendship and harmony, and particularly highlighted a black family
that embraced culture that reflected their heritage.
Absolutely novel at the time, the series was credited with presenting black culture to
a white audience, creating greater acceptance of it.
But the Huxtables lived in a bubble that was almost never pierced by discussions of race.
Though topics such as sexism, drugs, and learning disabilities would arise in the series, race
was largely subtextual.
This was a deliberate choice by Cosby, and is at the heart of why the show became beloved
by some audiences and hotly debated by others.
The world met the Cosby Show on September 20th, 1984.
The pilot, titled Pilot, began with Claire and the four Huxtable kids, Denise, Theo,
Vanessa, and Rudy, preparing breakfast while dancing to some music.
The cast had a nice, easy chemistry with one another, and we soon meet Cliff.
This moment helped establish the two parenting styles of the Huxtables.
While both Cliff and Claire are firm with their kids, Cliff is very much the goofy one
who enjoys messing around with the children.
Part of the inspiration for the series was the stand-up work Cosby was doing at the time,
and we can see the dialogue borrowed heavily from that material.
The pilot, along with many episodes in the earlier seasons of the Cosby Show, was very
light on plot, instead opting to include a number of scenes that reflected the everyday
moments of raising children, such as when Cliff is briefly introduced to Denise's
The main plotline of this episode, and certainly
its most memorable moment, surrounds Theo's report card, which is filled with straight
Ds.
He and Cliff discuss how low grades will lead to a low-paying job, and the economics
of that reality.
Theo reveals that the pressure of having such successful parents makes him feel as though
his parents don't love him for who he is.
In front of a test audience of kids, this was the moment a lot of them applauded, much
like the studio audience dutifully did after Theo made his point, but for a test audience
of adults, there was a much stronger reaction to the following line.
This moment reflected two very important reasons why the show became such a huge success.
The first was that, by making both perspectives, the child and the adults, it appealed to an
audience across generations, but perhaps more importantly, what adults appreciated was seeing
a parent establishing their authority.
In the early 1980s, what few sitcoms were on the air tended to feature precocious children
who often knew better than the adults around them.
Cliff so clearly demonstrated why he was the father of the family reversed that relationship,
and though it might have seemed novel at the time, it reflected an older vision of how
sitcoms used to work, where children would need a wise father to set their lives in order.
The father-knows-best dynamic was seen in shows such as The Andy Griffith Show, Leave
It to Beaver, and, well, Father Knows Best.
After airing, The Cosby Show was an instant hit, becoming the top-rated show not just
for its night, but for the entire week.
It began a streak of reading success that would propel the series to be the third most
watched show in the United States in its first season, and it was only going up from there.
The Cosby Show's early episodes had a very light, improvisational energy, and this was
reflected in how much of it was put together on the fly, particularly scenes with Bill
Cosby.
Cosby had a tendency to improvise his lines throughout each episode.
Returning to the show's producers, tapings tended to go long as Cosby would frequently
go off script and ad-lib through scenes.
As one example, a scene written as,
Cliff Cooking would turn into this.
This isn't to suggest that the show was entirely improvised, though.
Cosby's earlier work, Educating Children, informed how the series would be put together,
as one of the principles of the show was to create family situations that were realistic,
which meant plotlines deliberately crafted with that in mind.
One example is the episode Goodbye, Mr. Fish, in which the death of Rudy's goldfish Lamont
leads Rudy into mourning, and the family holds a funeral to protect Rudy's fragile
affections for her now-departed goldfish.
They find out Rudy's mourning period isn't as long as they expected.
The episode ends with Cliff accidentally dropping the fish into the toilet and the family getting
back to normal.
It's a realistic depiction of how kids are more resilient than we give them credit for,
while still highlighting the importance of a family that acknowledges and makes space
for kids to deal with those challenges.
But part of the reason the Huxtable Kids are so resilient is that in the early seasons
of the series, none of the challenges they personally face are more than a kid could
handle.
That's not to say that these things don't exist in the world of the Cosby Show.
Really bad things never happen to the Huxtable Kids.
Bad things only ever happen around them.
The episode titled Theo and the Joint from the first season might immediately sound like
an episode about Theo trying marijuana, but rather than being tempted by a drug, we instead
find out that the mysterious joint, Claire discovers in Theo's textbook, wasn't his,
but was hidden there by another student, Tony Braxton.
The Huxtables trusts Theo, though he insists on proving his innocence and Tony eventually
has a heart-to-heart moment with Dr. Huxtable.
This pattern of a Huxtable Kid avoiding danger is repeated in the season 3 episode, Calling
Dr. Huxtable where Vanessa's friend is revealed to have been smoking in Vanessa's room.
And in season 2's Close to Home, Cliff finds out the daughter of a friend is addicted
to drugs.
The fear of a child becoming addicted to drugs was a huge part of the 80s, with the launch
of anti-drug campaigns such as D.A.R.E.
A sitcom tackling these issues made perfect sense, though the Huxtable Kids themselves
are never presented to be at risk.
If anything, they were the positive influences in their peer group, telling their friends
not to smoke, or bringing a random kid home to talk to Cliff.
In this way, the Huxtables never felt quite so real as the world around them.
The drug-free behavior is often credited to the parenting of the Huxtables.
When Theo speaks to Tony about being concerned, here's how Theo explains it.
But conversely, when Cliff is talking to his friend, there doesn't seem to be an
easy answer as to how his daughter became addicted.
When Cliff says it's up to Cindy, his friend's daughter, to write her life, it serves as
an acknowledgement of the limitations of good parenting, and falls back on the message
of personal responsibility that runs throughout the series.
Though considering Theo's moment earlier on, personal responsibility is a trait imbued
in kids by their parents.
In the episode titled The Shower, Denise holds a bridal shower for her friend Veronica, who
is secretly pregnant.
Shockingly we find out the pregnancy was a ploy to get permission from her parents to
consent to her marriage.
Teen pregnancy came up again in the episode titled Denise's Friend, though in that case
it was a false alarm.
Much like the Huxtable kids and drugs, at no point is Denise ever in danger of becoming
pregnant.
Those are challenges for other families, not the Huxtables.
When it came to helping Veronica, it ended very much the way Close to Home ended, with
the Huxtables realizing the limitations of their influence around them.
There doesn't seem to be a clear satisfying answer to a situation like this one, but the
show's eventual moral of the importance of personal responsibility rings hollow.
The show's attempt to depict a realistic home life rests on the assumption of a home
life with two devoted parents, who have raised kids that are capable of avoiding serious
challenges in the world that go beyond the impact of a heart-to-heart conversation with
one of their parents.
The safe environment is taken for granted in the Cosby Show, making it easier to deliver
the message of personal responsibility.
And there are times when that personal responsibility theme, which is constantly hit throughout
the series, is completely fair and valid.
For instance, in the episode Denise Gets a D, Denise's bad grade forces her to acknowledge
her struggles in school.
With some help from Claire to encourage her along, Denise is able to take charge of her
schoolwork and make a better effort on her essay.
Episodes like these, while simple, send a positive message, but they're only possible
insofar that they exist in a world where the Huxtable kids are never truly challenged.
And when those challenges never permeate the Huxtable household, a place of strong family
tides and quality parenting emphasizing personal responsibility, it creates this implication
that those who face those challenges have some sort of personal moral failure created
by parents who have failed in raising their kids.
The Huxtable home is a world unto itself, a place where kids are always safe.
One particularly interesting way this is shown to us is how frequently young children take
center stage.
The series has a number of episodes that are happily narrated as being for the kids.
In The Slumber Party, Cliff suggests Rudy holds a sleepover, and when her friends arrive
we get a series of small moments of Cliff playing with the children.
The editing and natural reactions from the children feel that these scenes had a lot
of improvisation in them, and that a lot of fun is being had on set.
One of the very positive elements of moments like these is how it depicts a father having
fun with kids, something at odds with the more traditional roles for fathers on television,
being the strict, disciplinarian, or calm voice of reason, often being detached from
their kids and not engaging in fun or playful behavior.
The idea of Cliff Huxtable being all of those things expanded the idea of what a father
could be, much in the same way depicting Claire as a strong presence in the household as well
as being an accomplished professional, expanded the idea of what a mother could be.
The Huxtables also had ample time to work together to do nice things for one another,
one of the more famous examples is when for the 49th anniversary of Cliff's parents,
Russell and Anna, family performed a lip-sync of Ray Charles' Night Time is the Right
Time.
The Huxtables are very clearly a family with some financial resources.
Though a lot of plot lines involve Cliff and Claire imparting financial caution to their
children, they can't hide the fact that a family living in a brownstone in Brooklyn,
headed by a doctor and lawyer, is probably financially secure.
It certainly becomes readily apparent in the season 2 episode titled The Auction, and
it Claire bids for a painting by her great uncle, Ellis Wilson, titled Funeral Procession.
The
very idea of spending $11,000 on a painting is truly jaw-dropping in the context of an
upper middle-class family, it still seems like a lot, especially when there are five
kids to take care of, but it does reflect the wealth of the Huxtables, and how their
status as an average family isn't quite as average as one might initially suspect.
This even catches up to Vanessa in the season 3 episode, Vanessa's Rich, where she's
teased because her family could afford such an expensive painting.
The moral of this episode is that friends are who you make of them and shouldn't be
decided by class, though it's strange that when we hear about Vanessa being picked on,
it's for her supposed wealth.
Of all the forms of discrimination to face the Huxtables, their wealth is an odd choice.
While this may seem like the show having a squeamish approach to depictions of discrimination,
that wasn't entirely the case.
From the first season and onward, the Cosby Show didn't shy away from depicting sexist
characters and placing them very much in the wrong.
Though there were several examples in the early seasons, it's made most clear with
the introduction of Sandra's love interest, Elvin, played by Jeffrey Owens, first appearing
in the season 2 episode, Cliff in Love.
When we meet Elvin, we've already learned that he and Sandra have a rocky relationship,
having just broken up again.
When Elvin arrives, we get a sense of what the problem might be.
Claire encourages Sandra to move on, and her friends set her up with a guy named Daryl,
played by Joseph C. Phillips, who Cliff immediately tests.
The idea of being concerned about his daughter dating someone who respects women is a surprisingly
refreshing change of pace compared to sitcoms where fathers seem more concerned about their
daughter's chastity, as if it were property to be protected.
Sadly, much like how this episode ends with Sandra deciding to stay with Elvin, this enlightened
character would be a fixture throughout the series, with Jeffrey Owens becoming a recurring
guest star in season 2 and joining the principal cast permanently in season 3.
Many of the early scenes with Elvin tend to be Cliff teaching him to lose his less
enlightened takes, but a kind gesture from Elvin is immediately
In this episode, Cliff's lesson to Elvin is to fake being able to make pasta sauce, much in the way Cliff does.
While there's something nice about men teaching other men to be better to women,
there's a falsity to all of this that doesn't sit well. The very act of cooking your own sauce
without making it from scratch hardly seems like a distinction worth making, so what if Cliff or
Elvin get their sauce from a jar? But by supposedly making it from scratch, they're taking on a role
typically thought of as for women, and they do so so that the fury of the women won't come down
upon them. This reveals an essentialism that lies at the heart of the Cosby Show's stance on gender
dynamics. Women, of course, can do whatever men do, but the show also posits that they're emotional
and scary for these beleaguered men who will say and do whatever they need to to get by, whether
this means faking, making a meal from scratch, or holding their tongue when they have certain
thoughts. More than anything, this reflects the changing gender roles for women in society in
the 1980s, and some of the anxiety men feel towards them. Ultimately, Cliff has a good marriage, but
he's still connected to an earlier day with assumptions about women being emotional and
temperamental, which makes his supposedly respect for women limited, still using stereotypes instead
of giving them space to be who they truly are. So while Cliff's behavior is an improvement,
it only seems that way compared to someone like Elvin. As Elvin and Sandra's relationship develops,
Elvin's more overt sexism slowly fades, though it seems less a product of Elvin learning how to be
a better partner for Sandra, and more like his sexism was a trade the show didn't want to deal
with anymore. There was an episode that tried to depict them coming to a greater understanding with
one another, but it honestly read more like Elvin learning how to manipulate Sandra rather than him
learning how to respect her more as a person. Elvin isn't the only character struggling to
come to terms with gender politics, though. We see some of it in Theo in the season 2 episode,
Theo and the Older Woman, when Theo develops a crush on Denise's friend, and he learns that she
has a boyfriend. Theo doesn't take it well. Cliff has some decent advice for him.
And the episode ends with Theo finding a potential new love interest,
and taking an interest in his mother's garden as part of his process learning to understand
women as more complex beings. I also appreciate how it reveals the attitudes men hold are often
the real obstacle to these relationships flourishing, as women have no interest,
nor should they, in reverting to their less active places in the world from the days of
Cliff's youth. From its beginnings, the Cosby Show had no qualms dealing with sensitive topics
surrounding gender discrimination, drugs, or other fare for more somber sitcom episodes,
though quite noticeably there was one topic it rarely addressed head-on, and that was racial
discrimination. In the earlier seasons, and throughout much of the series, race was very
much a background aesthetic. References to culture included black authors, musicians,
and other artists, and this was buttressed by the numerous episodes featuring guest appearances by
black artists. This could be seen in episodes such as Play It Again, Russell, where Cliff's father
overcomes some anxiety to play with a band he had been in years before, complete with a number of
prominent, mostly black musicians backing him up. Although steeped in black culture, the Cosby Show
had very little to say about racism of the day. In fact, most discussions surrounding racism and
prejudice were framed as artists' backs from history. In one example, we see Russell with his
old military friends telling stories about their time serving during World War II.
And perhaps most compellingly, we hear stories from Cliff, Claire, and their respective parents
about participating on the march on Washington as part of the Civil Rights Movement. The premise
for this episode is that Thea's paper on the march was given a bad grade, as it merely recited a group
of loose facts copied out of a book. His family offers him a different way to look at the events
of that day, telling their own personal stories and experiences of attending the march.
This was a really great episode, maybe my favorite of the first three seasons.
It not only provides an interesting look at history, it also highlights the stories of the
people who are part of it. History can sometimes be reduced to facts of events that took place,
but a big part of why we care about history is because it affected real people, and hearing
their first-hand stories and experiences gives life to those events. But much like other moments
discussing racial discrimination in the series, it presents this struggle for racial equality as
historic. Recent history, yes, but history nonetheless. It isn't connected to Theo's life,
but rather presented as artifacts from the lives of his parents and grandparents. The fact that
his parents were there should speak to how recent everything was, and give them an opportunity to
connect that to Theo's life in the present. But aside from the great Theo gets on his paper,
it wasn't connected to his life in a direct way. The episode on its own was lovely, but in the
context of the Cosby Show more broadly, it sticks out, one of the few episodes to meaningfully
discuss race in America, and if there had been others that looked at it contemporarily, it would
have been fine. But as one of the few outliers, it doesn't do the subject justice from the context
of a discussion in the 1980s. This series aired alongside movies such as Spike Lee's Do the Right
Thing and music from Public Enemy, so these discussions were certainly happening. The Cosby
Show simply chose not to participate in them. The Cosby Show of course didn't need to be doing deep
dives on racial dynamics in 1980s America, but by not saying anything, it tacitly endorsed something
else. It reinforced the idea of colorblindness. The depiction of race on the show was very much
a concern for Bill Cosby while working on the series, so much so that he brought in professor
of psychiatry Alvin F. Poussaint to consult on it. According to Dr. Poussaint, he provided feedback
on every script and how accurately he believed it reflected a realistic portrayal of a black
family. The trouble with the white writers was not so much they were racist. It was that they didn't
have the experience. They didn't know the context of what they were writing about. He also reflected
some very real concerns regarding representation of black performance of different skin tones and
hair types. The sun, Theo, and I saw three or four dates and they were all light-skinned,
straight-haired black women. I said, Bill, who's casting these people? Bill went to the casting
director and said, I want you to get some dates for Theo and I want them to be pretty.
That's all he said. And the casting director said, oh, pretty, light skin, straight hair.
The one that came to depictions of overt racism, Dr. Poussaint stood alongside Bill Cosby in removing
or downplaying them within the context of the show. Bill said, that's like kind of corny,
straight stuff. He said, let's just show that she's really smart and the white people,
white lawyers interviewing her are jerks. While later seasons would introduce some more
thoughtful considerations about race, the early seasons were very much concerned with avoiding
presenting scenes where the Huxtables were victims of any sort of racial discrimination.
The emphasis was squarely on presenting positive images of a black family and by that positive
example undermining racism within society. One limitation of that approach is described by
sociologist Stuart Hall when he wrote, the problem with the positive-negative strategy is that adding
positive images to the largely negative repertoire of the dominant regime of representation increases
the diversity of ways in which being black is represented but does not necessarily displace
the negative. The Cosby Show's early seasons effectively reinforce the concept of the binary
of good and bad black representation on television by becoming the good ones. This reflects the
conservative values of the show. Although it may very well be aware of systemic challenges that a
black family faces, it does little to suggest changing that system aside from working within
the system's framework to create a better life for one's self and one's family. It reinforces
the idea that the American dream is in reach for black families so long as they play by the rules.
This is reflected in a speech given by Theo in the first season where he's accepted an award
for Cliff. One aspect of black culture the Cosby Show emphasized was the importance of
historically black colleges, very much fitting in with Cosby's well-worn refrain of emphasizing
education. It became a major plot point for Denise, particularly when it came to discussions
surrounding which post-secondary school she would attend. Cliff and his father very much
want Denise to attend Hillman, their alma mater. Eventually by the end of season two in the episode
Denise's decision Denise decides that she will attend Hillman. This school had everything that
I wanted and it also produced some very special people who went on to do great things including
having me. Denise goes off to school in season three though she still makes regular appearances
on the show as part of the cast. We even have an episode that sees the Huxtable family attend a
ceremony honoring the retirement of Hillman's president. This episode marked the end of one
era of the Cosby Show bringing with it a whole new world in the shape of a spin-off.
Starting in season four Lisa Bonet left the Cosby Show and would star a spin-off series titled
A Different World which had a backdoor pilot in the finale to the season three episode titled
Hillman. It would be set at a fictional historical black college following the trials of Denise
Huxtable trying to achieve a higher education. This was not the first time a backdoor pilot
appeared on the Cosby Show. In season one the episode Mr. Quiet served as a backdoor pilot for
a series starring Tony Orlando about a community center though it didn't quite capture enough
attention to become a series. On the other hand A Different World which was created by Bill Cosby
made a huge splash reaching number two in the ratings in its first season following its lead-in
program which was naturally the Cosby Show. The school has been identified as being modeled on
the historically black colleges Howard, Hampton, Spellman, and Morehouse. The last two most likely
because exterior shots of the school were done at Spellman and Morehouse. A Different World using
the comfortable lead of Denise Huxtable introduced audiences to a cast with more diverse backgrounds
than what they were seeing on the Cosby Show whereas the Huxtables lived a comfortable middle
class life with standard sitcom concerns. A Different World had black students from across
America representing a number of different experiences many of them evolving over the
years to become thoughtful, insightful portrayals. Denise was joined by her two roommates Jaleesa
played by Don Lewis and Maggie played by Marisa Tomei. Mary Alice as Letitia and Loretta Divine
as Stevie took turns as the dorm directors in the first season and the final two members of the first
season's principal cast were the oh so memorable pair of Whitley played by Jasmine Guy and Dwayne
played by Kadeem Hardison. A Different World is probably most fondly remembered for its life after
its first season though when Lisa Bonet exited the series and the show was put in the hands of Debbie
Allen, an alumna of Howard University and the real-life sister of Felicia Rashad. Darryl Bell and
Sinbad were promoted from reoccurring roles to the principal cast where they were joined by newcomers
Sharnell Brown, Kree Summer, Glenn Terman, and Lou Myers and perhaps most importantly the characters
Whitley and Dwayne were placed front and center with their romantic subplot being a major drive
in the series throughout the rest of its run. A Different World was lauded for being all the
things the Cosby Show wasn't. It provided a voice to a variety of black experiences in America and
didn't shy away for controversial issues such as homelessness, date rape, and was one of the first
TV shows to touch on the growing AIDS epidemic of the 1980s. It was also credited with raising
interest in historically black colleges. The series also broke stereotypes with Whitley probably being
the first southern bell portrayed by a black actress and Dwayne Wayne, a name so cool you have
to say the whole thing, being a hip guy who also happens to be a math whiz many years before the
geek chic thing became a trend. Not completely cut off from its spin-off roots, The Huxstables made
several guest appearances on the show, even after Lisa Bonet departed the series. Every member of
The Huxstable family made at least two appearances, albeit mostly in the first season. Though Felicia
Rashad, who appeared in four episodes, showed up in season two or later, Lisa Bonet even made a
brief return to the show for one episode in season three. Ahead of a different world's premiere,
Lisa Bonet's entry into the series did not seem entirely voluntary. In an interview with David
Letterman, she explained how she ended up on the show. And you're also getting your own,
you have your own pilot being spun off this Cosby thing. Yeah. Now, what is that about? Why would
you want to do that? Because they told me to. Although Bonet has not gone into detail about
her time on the show, reports from those who worked on the Cosby Show cited difficulties between her
and Bill Cosby, with her constantly resisting Cosby's need to control each part of the series.
Bonet's departure from a different world was largely driven by her pregnancy. Debbie Allen
wanted to keep Denise as a character on the show, thinking a single mother would introduce a fresh
dynamic. But Bill Cosby thought otherwise. He says, you know what, Debbie? No. She's pregnant.
Denise Huxstable is not pregnant. Lisa Bonet is pregnant, not Denise. So no, no, you can't have
it. No, we're not going to do it. No. So he took her back. I was so mad at him. I wanted to take
her, but I understood he just wanted her back. Lisa Bonet would remain a recurring star on the
Cosby Show on season five and would resume her full time status in season six.
Sandra and Elvin began season four as newlyweds, having announced their engagement in season three
and having been married in between the seasons. Although seemingly following in the footsteps of
Cliff and Claire, with Elvin going to med school and Sandra going to law school, the two instead
decide to drop out of school and open a wilderness store, which is, as best I could tell, a store to
buy camping supplies at. The couple decides to rent their first home together, and it similarly
does not inspire confidence in the Huxstable parents. Well, what do you think? So this is it.
Dad? It's an apartment, all right. Mom, dad, have a seat. Make yourselves at home. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
The couple go from grad students to working class in the blink of an eye,
though what seems like a fun new premise is short-lived, as by the time season five rolls around
and Elvin and Sandra have their first two children, Elvin reconsiders his decision to
leave medical school. They looked at them and they looked at me and I looked at her.
And then it came to me. I made a decision. Mom, dad, everybody. I'm going back to medical school.
And although Sandra doesn't have a similar scene, she eventually decides to go back to law school
as well. As a side note, the twins are named Winnie and Nelson, and while it's not explicitly
mentioned in the show, the names are of the bandellas who were in the middle of the battle
against apartheid in South Africa. This wasn't the only subtle show of solidarity, as Bill Cosby
apparently had to fight with the network for a sticker that read abolish apartheid to appear on
the door of Theo's bedroom. Season five opened with the episode together again and again,
with Denise returning from college for the summer and then eventually revealing she was
planning to drop out. What are you worried about? You're going back to him. No, I'm not. Yeah,
get serious. I am. I'm dropping out of school. What? With no major prospects on the horizon,
Denise moves back home with her parents. In the same episode, Theo, who is beginning his first
year at NYU, reveals that he forgot to mail the check for his dorm room, meaning he'll need a
place to stay. I said to you, son, don't forget to mail this. And you said no problem. And I went
right out and mailed it. I'm almost positive. And of course, this means one more Huxtable
Kid staying at home. It is believable that this boy deliberately did not mail that envelope so
that when he went down, there were no rooms that he would have to come back here and live. It is
believable that Denise does not want to go to college anymore because she wants to live here.
It is believable that this young man and this woman living in a condemned place on purpose
have this baby to make us feel sorry for them so they can come back here. In all three of these
cases, the Huxtable Kids are portrayed as having their lives in a bit of a mess. Something that
seems surprising when compared to how the early seasons seem to suggest that Cliff and Claire
were setting up their children for success. All those heart-to-heart talks encouraging them to
work hard, set goals for themselves, and plan for the future blow up the second they enter the real
world. And what ultimately keeps things from spiraling out of control for them is that they
have parents to bail them out. Not with words of wisdom, but with material support. Sondra and
Elvin get a loan for their apartment, while Denise and Theo get room and board. None of this, of
course, should be seen as condemning the Huxtables, but it does highlight a very important part of the
equation when it comes to their success in parenting. Growing up means making mistakes,
and sometimes those mistakes can have very real costs. The crucial difference here is that the
Huxtables can afford it when their kids make mistakes. One of the stated goals of the series
was to provide a positive example of parenting for families, but this positive example requires a
degree of material comfort that isn't realistic for a lot of families. Even before the Huxtable
Kids made mistakes, they still had their education paid for, a stable home, and were never in serious
want of anything. It's the sort of life any kid should have, but sadly many don't. If the early
seasons were presenting the Huxtable Kids in a bubble, no serious peril could ever pierce,
these seasons show the kids growing up into a more hostile world, but with the safety net of parents
who are able to provide material assistance. Denise exits the show for a second time in the
season 5 episode out of Brooklyn, where she gets a job alongside a photojournalist taking her to
Africa. Oh, I am so excited. You guys, don't worry about me. I'm gonna be fine. I know where I'm
going is gonna be difficult and rugged, but the most difficult part is gonna be being away from
you guys. I have always loved the sitcom trope of sending a character to the other side of the
world to explain why we don't see them for the next 21 episodes of the season. It can't be
understated how important Claire Huxtable is to the family dynamic. Cliff's antics tend to get
a lot of screen time, with Cosby making such a meal of his lines that it drifts into parody.
I shall lead with the queen of going to the garden and get the spain.
Felish Rashad takes control of scenes in a more quiet and controlled way. The show seems very
cognizant of the angry black woman trope, where black women are portrayed as being overly sassy
and ill-tempered as some kind of innate quality. Claire's character completely rejects that trope
by always being the calm voice of reason in most situations. In the season 5 episode, Mrs. Huxtable
goes to kindergarten, Claire is invited to join a Saturday morning TV show panel in which current
events are discussed. Her fellow panelists are taken aback at how capable she is in holding her
own in the heated debate. The Depression was still ravaging the nation when the stock market
began to recover. In my opinion, the crash was a precipitating event. That is the most ridiculous
thing I ever heard. I wouldn't call her opinion ridiculous, a bit naive. My opinion is neither
naive nor ridiculous in how the Sam Hill you expect to have a discussion if all points of
view are not taken into consideration. And we see a rare, and possibly only example of someone in
the Huxtable household facing racism. We're trying to broaden our viewership. Fine, then let her speak
when we get to the black topics. Excuse me, the black topics. Is that what I'm here to do,
talk about the black topics? No, you're also here to speak for women. Oh, that's nice. I am a woman
who is black, but I'm also a human being who is an attorney, a mother of five, and somewhat knowledgeable
about history, which is why I thought I was invited here. In that moment, Claire is reduced
to her identity in a way that invalidates her individual experiences, and her response,
instead of becoming indignant, is to hold herself to her own standard of behavior. I'm afraid we
only have 30 seconds left. In that time, could you please tell us what effect the Depression had on
the blacks? You want me to sum that up in 30 seconds. We learned that misery does not love
company. Another great part about this episode is how Cliff watched all of this happening in the
green room, confident that his wife could handle herself through the experience. She eventually
leaves the show in spite of efforts from the producers to keep her. Getting up at 4 30 in the
morning to prove who I am to three men who are basking in the non-existent rays of their own
intelligence is not my idea of a fun time. What was interesting about this episode is that it
showed a type of casual racism, and it does so among an educated class of people you might have
assumed knew better. And it stretches across the political spectrum, with the panelists being both
from the right and left. But perhaps most striking is how Claire can somehow rise above that. Her
behavior isn't surprising. She's behaving the way you would have expected her to having watched her
for over four seasons, but it flies in the face of a caricature she could have become. And one of
the few times we see Claire get upset, it's rare enough that it can be accepted as her just being
fed up with her kids in an exceptional moment.
Son, this is a wilderness. Denise is in the jungle, and she's on the locomotion.
Before the mothers come in here and see me, they'll be blaming me. Yeah,
running around here dressed in nothing, jumping around like they just hopped off the hot seat.
Suppose some fool comes along, sees that, takes them seriously. Vanessa could end up on a stage
somewhere across the country cliff in a smoked field cafe, singing and dancing and gyrating
like that. And I won't be around to take the tissues out then. I'm not.
Claire's outrage in that moment doesn't set the character back, because we know this isn't
something she usually does. And even this rare display of anger still feels like a part of the
character. And part of why it does is because Claire always feels authentic. In the episode
Birthday Blues, we get a taste of that as Claire deals with her kids thinking she'll be far more
fragile than she is on her 46th birthday. Mom, I apologize for your daughter's insensitivity. I
asked them not to bring up your age because I knew it would be rough on you. But it's not
rough for me. I love being 46. I think it's a lovely age. So do I. You look good for your age.
Thank you. No, I mean it. You really look good. Yeah, Mom, you really look good. Really?
Thank you. And Cliff's behavior isn't much better. You still look good. Now, why did you use that
word still? You didn't use to talk like that. You used to say, Claire, you look good. Am I not
supposed to look good? You're absolutely correct. The word still is out. You look good.
The fixation on Claire's appearance seems to annoy her more than whether or not she still has it at
46. Part of that confidence may come from her knowing she still has it, but more importantly,
she just seems so at ease with who she is. It projects a confidence in herself that makes
everything she does seem so real. Even if it sometimes makes Claire seem almost superhuman
with how she walks through her life, she's just flawed enough to be a vision of what it might be
to succeed in the world. Season 6 brought with it some major changes to the show with its premiere,
Denise, The Saga Continues. It featured the return of Lisa Bonet to the principal cast,
and she brought two new members with her. The first is Joseph C. Phillips, playing Denise's
new husband, Martin. The second is three-year-old Raven Simone, who played Denise's new stepdaughter,
Olivia. Olivia, honey, this is the house where Denise grew up.
The Huxtables are completely unaware of Denise's recent nuptials, and are even less ready for this
new family to move into their home. But once again, the Huxtable household is filled with life,
introducing some new storyline potential. You might have assumed this new dynamic would give
Lisa Bonet some new storylines, but Denise's character seems unfocused and inconsistent,
not just in her exploits, but the show doesn't seem to know what to do with her character at
this point. If anything, these new additions actually open the door for Raven Simone to
really shine, as Olivia soon becomes one of the most prominent members of the cast.
Lisa Bonet would depart from the show part of the way through season 7, and would not return at all
for season 8. Phillips would lead the principal cast in season 7 as well, but did still appear
as a guest star in one season 8 episode. Olivia, however, would be a big part of the series right
up to its final episode. The in-show reason for Olivia's parents' departure was explained as Martin
being stationed in various parts of East Asia and Denise wanting to be with him. They decided Olivia
would be best off stage with the Huxtables. The one season 8 episode that Phillips returned to
perform in allowed Martin to have an interesting episode with his daughter.
Martin's departure in that final appearance was a good episode about a family being something
more than your immediate relations, and it's one of the few episodes using Olivia that resonated
beyond what we had already seen, with Cliff playing with other children. Lisa Bonet's return
and eventual final departure made some news at the time, but another controversy that hit the
series during this period was about the opening credits for season 7. Each season of the Cosby
show quite noticeably used unique credit sequences for each season, each featuring the cast dancing
to a different version of his opening theme, Kiss Me. Depending on which opening you were seeing or
hearing, you could tell which season was airing. Originally, season 7 opened with the cast dancing
in front of a mural inspired by another mural titled Straight of Dreams, painted by inner city
kids from the Creative Arts Workshop in Harlem. The workshop director, Brookie Maxwell, argued that
the kids should get credit for the mural and, in response, Cosby pulled the intro for season 7
instead using a slightly altered version of the season 6 opening. Eventually, a compromise was
reached regarding use of the mural, and the intro for season 7 was used for season 8, with credit
going to 63 young artists in the show's closing credits. In earlier seasons of the Cosby show,
much of the episodes about Vanessa focused on her dating life and escapades with her friends.
Most of these episodes were pretty tame, and pretty standard stuff for a sitcom. For example,
in season 5's Truth or Consequences, we see Vanessa nearly have sex with her boyfriend at the time,
Jeremy. Jeremy comes off as a bit of a creep, clearly trying to manipulate Vanessa, but she
stands up for herself thanks to her parents instilling her with good values, and all is well
in the huckstable world. In other words, a typical episode. By the time the seventh season rolled
around, Bledsoe's role on the show was reduced. The in-show reason was that Vanessa had excelled
in school so much she was skipped four years so she could attend college. The real-world version
was similar in that Tempest Bledsoe wanted to attend college, and with some encouragement
from Bill Cosby, arrangements were made so she could attend full-time while still being a part
of the show. Bledsoe's accommodation seems to be one of the few that was given enthusiastically
by Cosby, likely due to the emphasis he had always placed on kids getting an education.
Although Bledsoe was still attending NYU's Stern School of Business, Vanessa made a surprising
return in season 8 with a new character in tow, her fianc played by William Thomas Jr. with the
unforgettable name of Dabness Brickie.
The sudden engagement kept secret for six months, and the two of them only having known
each other for a year is made even more surprising when we learn that the 18-year-old Vanessa
is planning to marry a 30-year-old Dabness. We learn some other stuff about Dabness,
such as having served in the military and being the head of maintenance at the College Vanessa
is attending. The approval of the Huxtables isn't easily won by Dabness, and there's this
undercurrent of snobbery whenever his financial status is brought up. Although Cliff and Claire
insist they aren't bothered by his job.
The Huxtables are concerned that Vanessa isn't ready for marriage,
which we do eventually learn is true, but when Claire says she was concerned that Vanessa kept
Dabness a secret, she pivots away from Vanessa's explanation that she thought her parents would
judge him by his job by simply saying that it's lame. It raises the issue that, for six months,
Vanessa never felt comfortable mentioning she had a new boyfriend who happened to be a maintenance
man. And while the Huxtables can claim it doesn't bother them, Dabness's job and his perceived lack
of wealth is still used as a punchline. Here's how some of the family reacts to Vanessa's engagement
ring. I felt so bad for Dabness in that moment.
He isn't a lawyer or a doctor, and maybe he didn't have wealthy parents to pay his way through
school, but the way his job is used as a punchline undercuts whatever Cliff or Claire might say about
not judging him based on that. We eventually see Cliff soften to Dabness, but only when he finds
out he has his own house. Eventually, Dabness wins over the entire family, largely on account
of being a decent guy who happens to be handy around the house. The wedding never comes to
pass, as the engagement is eventually called off when Vanessa refuses to set a date. And we have
this cute little moment where Dabness unloads to Cliff. Dabness does show up for the series finale,
leaving the door open for him and Vanessa getting back together, but we never get closure on this
romance. What's frustrating about this plotline is how little we get a sense of what Vanessa wants.
The anxiety over how Vanessa thinks her parents will react takes some of the earlier episodes,
where the opinions of the Huxtables are presented as a guidepost to good behavior,
and we see how the shadow of those expectations leave Vanessa to react impulsively. This makes
season 8 a bit more interesting, as it's one of the rare instances where the parental advice
actually backfires. It shows some drawbacks to the Huxtable method, and makes the whole family
seem a little more flawed and relatable as a result. In earlier seasons, a Rudy-centric episode
would typically be about something very low stakes, such as the season 4 episode, It Ain't
Easy Being Green, where Rudy insists on wearing summer clothes to a fall party.
Cliff resolves this with a compromise, letting Rudy choose her clothes out of a selection of
fall clothing. Although stakes of this episode work really well, because Rudy is eight,
and something so small as not choosing her clothes would seem like a big deal to her,
and the resolution, letting Rudy have slightly more control over her life, is sensible and sweet.
In later seasons though, Rudy's storylines began to evolve. We see Rudy becoming a stronger,
more assertive character, and what makes that readily apparent in later seasons is thanks to,
in no small part, the introduction of her friend Kenny, also known as Bud, played by Dion Richmond.
Third Dynamic is initially just for cute moments where Rudy has to assert her strong personality
after Kenny says something incredibly stupid.
They're cute little moments, but they evolve into something so much more. Most of the
interactions the hostable kids have with the opposite gender are usually done in the context
of dating. This is partially true of Rudy in later seasons, as we see her start to enter the dating
world, but Rudy and Kenny's relationship takes a different path. Although them becoming a couple
is teased at in the earlier seasons, by the time season 8 rolls around, we see Rudy instead dating
a new character, Stanley, played by Merlin Santana. Kenny takes exception to the new couple,
and does whatever he can to undermine them.
Kenny goes so far as to fake having a girlfriend in an effort to make Rudy jealous,
though eventually an important lesson about friendship is learned.
He's just that he's always there. Sorry I acted like a jerk to him.
That's okay, I acted like one too. So what happened to Deidre?
I walked her home. Said she got me tomorrow if I called her.
Are you gonna call her?
Oh yeah.
Guess you're gonna have to call somebody sometime.
Yeah, now you and I have something coming again.
Well, I'm happy for you.
I'm happy for me too. I'm happy for you.
So does this mean you won't be tagging along with me and Stanley anymore?
Well, I'll be tagging.
I'll just have Deidre with me.
We'll double.
I really like how this friendship blossomed between Rudy and Kenny.
Girls and boys should be able to be friends, even with the messiness of a one-sided attraction.
How you see someone one day isn't how you'll see them for the rest of your life,
and learning how to grow past someone who isn't interested is a great sign of maturity and growth.
Being able to do this at 13 seems like a stretch, especially considering the attitudes towards
women Kenny was carrying with him, but it's still a positive message.
In the 90s, a decade this show was just entering, there was still a lot of confusion about the way
evolving gender dynamics would influence relationships, and Kenny's advice on his
brother representing an older, easier way of looking at them.
The Cosby Show uses the strength of Rudy as a female character to challenge these assumptions,
and create a new script that lets everyone find some happiness,
and not have the world warp to fit the desires of Kenny.
It also means Rudy didn't have to choose between dating someone she likes and keeping one of our
oldest friends.
As the Cosby Show reached its seventh season, it was starting to show signs of waning popularity.
ABC's Roseanne was gradually gaining ground, and the Cosby Show's dominance on Thursday nights
was about to be challenged by a serious contender, The Simpsons, on Fox.
Season 7's premiere was one of the only episodes of the Cosby Show to begin with a cold opening,
acknowledging the series' new rival.
In the first weeks of competition, there was much discussion about The Simpsons beating the
Cosby Show in key markets.
However, by the end of the year, The Cosby Show would still finish well ahead of The Simpsons.
Even with The Cosby Show holding onto the crown of its Thursday night time slot,
it still had a fall in the overall ratings.
Breaking its streak of five consecutive years as the number one show in the United States,
it would finish its seventh season as the fifth most watched show, and by its eighth season,
it would fall to 18th, right behind its own spin-off, A Different World.
The new challenge to its dominance hadn't been ignored, though, and The Cosby Show made a big
addition in its seventh season to keep people interested.
It introduced a new member to the family, Claire's cousin, Pam Tucker, played by Erika Alexander.
Pam grew up in a single-parent household, and she joined the Huxtables when her mother
was forced to leave New York to take care of Pam's grandmother in California.
Pam stayed behind to finish her high school education,
and the Huxtables offered to take her in so she'd have a place to stay.
Pam's background of being working class brought a new dynamic to the show,
a regular cast member who led a very non-Hux-table kind of life.
Pam appeared alongside some friends, Karen Molina White as Charmaine,
Alan Payne as Lance, and Michonne Lee as Slide, Pam's boyfriend.
The impression these teens have of the Huxtable home reveals the class dynamics at play.
But a few words from the Huxtables settle everyone down.
And very quickly, we get a sense of what this show's new dynamic will be like.
Pam is coming from a poorer neighborhood, but it isn't just the wealth that's going to change
her life, it's the strong influence of the Huxtables themselves.
One thing I appreciated about Pam's appearance is that there's no judgment about her family,
such as lines about her mother being an unfit parent.
All we see is an acknowledgement about that her life has certainly been a tougher one.
Pam's storylines often felt very different than the ones impacting the Huxtable kids.
For example, we had seen Vanessa being pressured into having sex,
but it didn't compare to the pressure Pam faced in Season 7 in the two-parter just thinking about it.
Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam,
Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam,
Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam,
Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, Pam, answering, answering, answering, answering, answering, answering, answering, answering.
Although Pam and Sly get back together, it wouldn't last
and they would eventually break up for good.
Pam would soon be dated a new character named Aaron, played by Seth Gilliam.
Do you speak French? I do a little, actually a lot.
Not because I am smart, I just studied it in school.
Anybody can do that, it's not like I'm the smartest guy in class.
You're not? No.
There are at least... 4 other people smarter than me. Well, maybe 3.
Pam's new love interest more closely resembles the world of the Huxtables.
It symbolizes how Pam is changing in the series, taking on the characteristics of her new household.
Although there's no judgment of Pam or her background, the show makes the subtle argument that, for Pam to be happy,
she needs to live more like the Huxtables.
We see this in her academic life as she goes from being indifferent to school to working hard to get better grades.
You know when I first came here, you people didn't look all that good to me.
But you welcomed me, made me feel at home, gave me curfew.
Just in case I do decide to go to college, I'm studying.
But Pam might not be able to afford to go to college after all.
Well, dear, if she's gonna go to college, how's she gonna pay for it?
Oh, that's the least of her worries.
Oh, I beg your pardon?
That'd be silly. She'll work.
She's gonna work.
She can work like I did. She can work in the post office like I did.
Dear, you worked in the post office during the Christmas holidays.
The episode's final moments make us sit with that question, watching Pam get down to study.
But to what end?
Claire seemed strangely ambivalent, as if things will just work out for Pam.
But how will that happen?
How will she take advantage of this opportunity of a stable home life letting her study more, if she simply can't afford tuition?
Unfortunately, we never get a decent conclusion to this plotline.
In season 8, in the episode Pam Applies to College,
the idea of Pam not being able to afford to go to school is completely dropped,
and instead it becomes a case of her grades not being high enough,
with only one semester of solid work after having moved in with the Huxtables.
Pam, look, it takes more than one semester of work to get into college.
But I wanna go.
You know, all this time you people tell me go to college, go to college.
Now I wanna go to college and you people won't let me in.
But you people would make up your mind.
And this is more or less how it all gets wrapped up.
I suppose Pam starts working jobs to eventually afford college, but that's just a guess.
We don't get a better look of how things will turn out for her.
Unfortunately, the Cosby Show doesn't really give us an understanding of what life is like for someone who wants to go to college but can't afford it.
Although Pam was meant to give us a look at the world outside the Huxtable home,
it reveals how timid the show can be to really take a look at it.
It lets Pam exist in the Huxtable world, but doesn't do much to describe hers,
and if anything, she conforms to that new world more so than bringing a new perspective to it.
In the sixth season, it was revealed that Theo's lack of educational achievement was a product not of him having bad study habits,
but rather having dyslexia.
The night before the test, I knew I was gonna get an A.
Yeah, because you told me that you were gonna knock it out of the park.
And I got a C.
You guys, I'm sick of being stupid.
Ms. Roscoe gave me the test results back.
And?
What did she say?
You guys, I'm dyslexic.
This episode, Theo's gift, even writes a few wrongs when the Huxtables re-examine their own behaviors when it came to their parenting of Theo.
And to thank Theo, all those years you were doing lousy in school and dad called you lazy.
I know.
He has been pretty rough on me.
I don't think that this is the time for you to bring these things up.
Well, I don't blame you, Mom. You must feel just as bad.
Excuse me?
And with the appropriate techniques, Theo is able to work through his dyslexia and starts improving his academic performance.
As Theo's grades improve, he makes the Dean's List and starts setting himself up to go to grad school.
One of his interests is teaching, so we see him take a job at the local community center in a poorer community running an after-school program.
It's here where the Cosby Show once again tries to give the audience a broader look at the Black American experience.
We get a chance to meet Theo and his new supporting cast of young teens in Theo and the Kids, Part 1.
Where Theo quickly realizes watching over some kids at an after-school program is going to be tougher than he imagined.
Rosa! Rosa! Rosa! Rosa!
Hey! Hey! Hey!
Now I want everybody to sit down and shut up.
This is the episode where we first meet Stanley, Rudy's eventual love interest, and learn that, like Theo, he may also have dyslexia.
All my life, I felt like I was walking in the basement, and everybody had to lie to him but me.
See, I had a little flashlight. I could see a little bit of this, a little bit of that, but I could never see the whole room.
Stanley, you're walking through life with a flashlight, and you don't have to.
While a nice short story of Theo making a difference in one kid's life, what makes this two-parter interesting is Theo's attempt to connect to another student, named Rahim, played by Keenan Scott.
You want to talk about it, man?
What's the talk about? They laid off half my father's shift at the paper company.
I'm sorry to hear that, man. I mean, let's just hope it's temporary.
Yeah, I hope so, too. But in the meantime, I'm not going to be coming to the center.
Why not?
Because I'm the oldest. I got to make some money, so after school, I'm going to be delivering groceries at the supermarket.
After this week, I'm out of here. Peace, Mr. Huxtable.
Rahim's family's struggle with Bunny is something Theo can't fix on his own, and sadly, reflective of the problems a lot of Rahim's classmates face.
Rahim slams the bag down on the floor.
You know, every day, we get these lunches, these box lunches, with apples, carrots, sandwiches, milk, you know.
Now, this one girl, every day, she volunteers to go around and collect the garbage, and then she goes out in the hallway.
So, of course, I'm thinking she's separating the stuff for recycling.
Dad, she opened that backpack, and there was all this food.
And she told me that she takes the food home to feed her family.
Theo simply can't save all his students.
I'll save a seat for you.
Actually, I don't want that seat. I want to sit next to that girl, Cal. I think she likes me.
You got it.
This gives us another glimpse into the world outside the Huxtable home and the limitations of its approach.
It can make a positive difference, sending Theo out in the world to help a kid like Stanley, but for Rahim and many of his fellow students, Theo can't make the impact he wishes he could.
I appreciate the different challenges of these kids being brought up.
We're seeing class struggles and the limited impact of a good teacher, but it doesn't completely disregard the fact that a good teacher does make a difference.
Even if it isn't enough to change the world, it can at least provide some comfort and support for these kids.
This two-parter closed Season 7, and we saw more of Theo with these kids in Season 8, but unfortunately, it didn't go a heck of a lot deeper than what we saw in these episodes.
We do meet Rahim one more time in the Season 8 episode, Cliff and Theo Come Clean.
It's never explained how he got back into the after-school program, but his financial problems remain, as seen when he discovers some money and the kids have a debate over what should be done with it.
The money is eventually returned to its owner, but the episode luckily doesn't end with such a simple lesson.
But the people who need it most never get it. Other people get it. Like politicians, movie stars, ballplayers, preachers, they're all taking down big bucks.
Yeah, you're right.
But they're not all good people. Some do drugs, some steal it, some even lie all the time just to keep their money.
But what does it have to do with Rahim?
This Rahim? This Rahim should have kept his mouth shut and walked out of here with that money.
This Rahim is the last on his fool.
Theo lets Rahim know he would have done just the same, and so would his classmates, and it might have been enough to impress Letitia, one of Rahim's classmates, which seems to placate him, but does little to address the very real problems he brought up.
The episode states quite plainly that we shouldn't sacrifice our personal ethics in pursuit of a more just world, and it reflects one of the more depressing messages of the series.
Take care of yourselves, and eventually things will work. Or maybe they won't. But at least you won't be corrupted. You'll just be hungry.
One bright part in this subplot was seeing Theo grow as a character.
In season 8, he was both accepted into grad school and offered a high paying job with a major corporation.
He relished the chance to have options in his life, though he ultimately decided to pursue grad school so he can keep working with kids like Stanley and Rahim.
And this of course leads us to the series finale, titled, And So We Commence, a two parter about the Hoxtable family getting ready for Theo's graduation. It would air on April 30th, 1992.
The ending of The Cosby Show was a major event for NBC, with ads circulating widely promoting this finale.
You're invited to witness a special chapter in television history, an event people will be talking about for months to come. The final Cosby Show.
The episode itself, however, proved to be a bit tepid. Perhaps that made it more fitting for a series that was about small moments and simple plots, but for an ending to an eight year story, it felt a bit flat.
The plotline through this two parter was the tension over whether or not Theo would find enough tickets for his expansive family.
Eventually he does. And that pretty much sums up the finale's plot. There are some cute moments, such as a role reversal between Theo and Cliff.
And Cliff's reaction to the surprise return of Dabness is fun.
Hi, Daddy.
Dabness. Dabness. Dabness. Dabness. Dabness.
How are you, sir?
Hi, Dad.
Dabness.
Denise also makes an appearance, although Lisa Bonet certainly does not. Instead, we see a brief scene where everyone talks to Denise over the phone and we find out that she's pregnant.
What?
My baby.
My baby's having a baby.
The plot for this two parter is so thin, we get a flashback to the first episode for six whole minutes.
As the series ends, Cliff and Claire dance together to celebrate another child successfully on their way.
The final line you can scarcely hear comes from Cliff, or maybe it's Bill at this point, saying,
Come on, let's go, as the two continue to make personal comments, fading into obscurity as they move towards the audience.
And with that, the Huxtables danced off into the sunset.
The final episode was more a celebration of the series rather than an ending.
It's clear that the Huxtables' lives will go on, whether there's a camera to capture them or not.
We just got a few years to watch the escapades.
The finale offers a small chance to reflect on the themes of the series, the value of good parenting, a proper education,
and the need for the financial means to make that happen.
Theo embodies the success of this philosophy, to make a better world in his immediate surroundings,
though perhaps not changing the wider world outside of that.
In many ways, it's a good metaphor for the Cosby Show itself.
It wasn't a series that tried to change television by rewriting the rules, so much as it tried to make itself a positive example.
And its example led to a new age of family-friendly sitcoms, one that felt safe and comfortable but didn't necessarily rock the boat.
The finale of the Cosby Show aired on April 30, 1992, which was the second day of what are commonly called the 1992 Los Angeles riots,
though some might prefer the name of the 1992 Los Angeles uprising.
These were precipitated by the brutal arrest and beating of Rodney King, in which four police officers beat King, unaware that they were being filmed at the time.
The footage sparked outrage, and the four officers were charged.
On April 29, they were acquitted of those charges, sparking unrest in the city.
Though live news coverage dominated the evening in Los Angeles, it was suspended for an hour to air the final episode of the Cosby Show, a decision made by the local NBC affiliate.
Today, Mayor Tom Bradley urged everyone in Los Angeles to remain home, to stay off the streets.
He also suggested they might want to watch the Cosby Show because he believes, and we believe, we need this time, a bit of a cooling off period, giving us some breathing space.
Maybe a time to remember what Thursday nights were like before all this madness began in Los Angeles.
The Rodney King video revealed a truth known in black communities for decades.
The police would often, with impunity, brutalize black men during arrest, something that still happens today.
There's something fitting about the Cosby Show, which was often accused of obscuring racism of the day, having its finale being used for the exact same purpose.
Cosby's own feelings about the situation were made clear in an interview.
It is very difficult to look at the King tape and feel that this is not excessive force, and obviously the people were waiting for some kind of reprimand, and when they got and saw nothing at all, the response came.
Now, how do you say these people are irresponsible without first committing responsibility to a verdict?
I don't understand.
However, when asked about the decision to air the episode in Los Angeles, Cosby said in an interview,
that for eight years had given people a good feeling about themselves.
It seems clear by these words that Bill Cosby never meant for his show to directly address the realities of discrimination black Americans faced in the modern day, at least not at a level of detail that could possibly hope to address something like police brutality.
The Cosby Show rarely mentioned race at all, and what it did often didn't include the central cast.
Here's a rare example from the series.
And none of the principal cast is even present in this scene.
It's a moment that happens, and just as easily moved on from.
The show just wasn't terribly interested in tackling the topic of racial discrimination.
It raises the question of what this show meant to the audience it was designed to uplift.
What were the reactions to the Cosby Show from black audiences?
One prominent criticism was an editorial published in the New York Times titled,
TV's Black World Turns But Stays Unreal, by literary scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr.
While I applaud Cosby's success at depicting, at long last, the everyday concerns of black people, love, sex, ambition, generational conflicts, work and leisure,
far beyond reflex responses to white racism, the question remains, has TV managed to depict a truly different world?
Gates's writing reflects what many black critics of the show had observed,
and Cosby himself addressed some of those concerns in interviews.
In one 1989 interview he said,
I agree with critics who say it doesn't do enough, but the people who are viewing it are having a ball with it.
We get thank you letters from all over the US, Canada and Europe.
I know I've got to go a distance with it.
And in another interview expressed concern that if he highlighted racial conflict, it would make white viewers feel like they were the villain.
In 1995, Leslie B. Innes and Joe R. Fiegen published an article titled,
The Cosby Show, The View from the Black Middle Class, in the Journal of Black Studies.
The authors had over 100 members of the Black Middle Class describe their opinions on representations in media,
and the article highlighted the many thoughts related to The Cosby Show.
Here are a few examples of the responses they got.
I do know that this is just entertainment, but my kids think it's the way we should live.
That is unfair.
It is unfair for me to explain to my son that, no, mom is not a lawyer, dad is not a doctor, and these things don't work that way.
I think it's really sad.
I wish we had more shows like Cosby on TV, where you have a black doctor and the wife is a lawyer, because they do exist.
I mean, they're on a small scale, percentage-wise, but they do exist, and I think we take too many negatives and blow them up.
I have a problem with the fact that The Cosby Show will build a 30-minute episode around Heathcliff Huxtable building a hero sandwich.
Why aren't we dealing with some real issues that are confronting the Black Middle Class?
Yes, the kids go to NYU and other great universities like that, but what they come home talking about is what this racist professor said and did,
and I don't see that occurring on The Cosby Show.
As you can see by some of the responses highlighted, there is no overarching positive or negative trend in the comments.
The authors of the article observed that the overwhelming theme in the responses were how mixed they all were,
often reflecting on both positive and negative aspects of the program.
Considering these comments are about the most popular show in the country, it undermines the sort of enthusiasm you might expect for such a big hit.
It reveals to us that the show perhaps struck a stronger chord, not with the Black audiences it hoped to inspire, but the white audiences who found comfort in it.
The Cosby Show would be re-examined many times over the years, as more sitcoms starring Black families deviated from its squeaky-clean aesthetic.
But it was comments from a particular speech of Bill Cosby's that would once again offer the chance to reframe the show and the work Cosby had done throughout his career.
Get in somebody else's business.
On May 17, 2004, during an NAACP Legal Defense Fund award ceremony in Washington, D.C.,
commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision,
Bill Cosby gave a speech where he made some very pointed remarks about the Black community.
These are people going around stealing Coca-Cola.
People getting shot in the back of the head over a piece of pound cake.
And then we all run out and wear outrage.
Oh, the cops shouldn't have shot him.
How was he doing with the pound cake in his hand?
Everybody knows it's important to speak English, except these knuckleheads.
You can't land a plane with why you ain't where or how to hunt it.
You can't be a doctor with that kind of crap coming out of your mouth.
The speech had a number of factual errors,
and I've included an article that rebuts many of its points below.
Perhaps the most famous response to the speech came from Michael Eric Dyson,
who wrote, is Bill Cosby right, or has the Black middle class lost his mind?
In an interview with NPR, Dyson gave a rundown of his critique of Cosby's speech.
The interview was preceded by remarks from Bill Cosby that clarified his infamous speech.
I'm looking at, in the lower economic area,
the 50 percent dropout of the African American male from high school.
And I'm realizing that there's a great deal of racism.
We take that. We all know that.
But then again, there's a time when we have to turn around the mirror and look at ourselves.
And in that NPR program, we get to hear Dyson's response to that.
The best of our Black leaders and intellectuals who have always remembered it's a both and,
even as you speak about personal responsibility,
you link that personal responsibility to its possibility of realization
in a culture that either enables you to do better or puts its foot on your neck and keeps you from rising.
And what's more, he explains the harm done by Bill Cosby by making these debates
happening within Black communities available to the broader public.
They get in on a conversation that's been going on for a long time among Black folk
who are speaking shorthand and they don't quite get it.
So now public policymakers who hear Mr. Cosby assaulting the poor
and saying that they are responsible begin to change their mind.
They say, well, we thought we had to help them because we had to indict our own social practices
for their failure to be able to assist these people.
Now, as Mr. Cosby is saying, they got to do it themselves.
So maybe we shouldn't put this extra money into this program.
Much of what Cosby had said in his speech could be seen in his work over the decades,
including the Cosby show.
In the season eight episode, For Men Only, we see what Cliff Huxtable's advice
to teen boys at a community center look like.
The message is, quite clearly, the only thing stopping these guys from making a future for themselves
is the decisions they make.
It's very conservative messaging.
You could almost imagine Huxtable handing out bootstraps.
And while it's not a bad message, personal responsibility is a good thing.
It doesn't address the additional challenges these guys will face trying to escape a life of poverty.
Cliff recommends a higher education, but how do they afford it?
And what burden will this place on their family?
And it's a bit galling to hear this from Cliff Huxtable,
because how many of his kids had to work an additional job to afford their tuition?
Even with the momentary backlash against the poundcake speech,
Bill Cosby's reputation was still healthy enough that,
by the time the 30th anniversary of the Cosby show rolled around in the fall of 2014,
there was a round of positive media coverage examining its longevity and success.
In some cases, articles hypothesize that the success of the Cosby show helped prepare America for its first black president.
Though Bill Cosby was still widely credited with being America's dad,
that image would be changed in late 2014,
when a story he likely thought buried once again returned to the surface.
The following section includes sexual assault.
If you would like to skip ahead, go to the timestamp below.
In 2004, Andrea Konstan, director of operations for the women's basketball team at Temple University,
claimed that Bill Cosby had given her pills that made her semi-unconscious and unable to move.
And while she was in that state, she alleged that Cosby sexually assaulted her.
In January of 2005, Konstan filed a criminal complaint.
Cosby claimed that the counter was consensual.
The case was eventually dropped by the prosecutor,
seeing it as a case of he said, she said.
But Konstan then filed a civil claim against Cosby in March of 2005,
alongside 13 women who offered to be witnesses,
making similar claims about Cosby's predatory behavior.
The case was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum in November of 2006.
In June of 2006, Philadelphia Magazine published an article by Robert Huber titled,
Dr. Huxtable and Mr. Hyde,
that began to pull back on the carefully crafted public persona that Cosby had made for himself.
Interspersed with this article are the stories of some of the women Cosby had assaulted,
revealing damning details.
The story of Cosby being a sexual predator did not capture public attention,
or at least it would not for another eight years,
when a clip from a stand-up performance by Hannibal Perez went viral in late 2014.
Suddenly, the media was all over the story,
and even more women started coming forward with similar accounts as to what happened to Konstan
and the other women who came forward.
In total, over 60 women came forward with accusations against Cosby,
ranging from sexual harassment to rape.
With mounting public pressure,
the lawyer for Konstan requested that the deposition made by Cosby in the 2005 case be unsealed.
The judge agreed, citing Cosby's role as a public moralist.
When the deposition was unsealed, it revealed that Cosby had admitted to giving women quaaludes before having sex with them.
According to Cosby, these encounters were consensual, though many of his 60-plus accusers dispute that.
The statute of limitations had expired on many of the claims his accusers had made,
so they couldn't be tested in court.
Only Konstan's accusations still existed within the statute of limitations,
and would eventually go to criminal court.
In December of 2015, Cosby was charged with three instances of aggravated indecent assault,
and in April of 2018, he would be found guilty on all three charges.
He was sentenced to three to ten years in state prison.
Cosby's castmates from the series have largely remained quiet about the situation,
though I did appreciate this comment from Joseph C. Phillips.
I think like a lot of people, I was really giving Bill the benefit of the doubt.
This was not the man that I knew. This is not the man that I worked with.
He may have had other faults, but he certainly was not drugging people and raping them.
And then I had a conversation with an old friend.
Bumped into her. I hadn't talked to her in a couple of years.
I just thought, hey, he used to be like your mentor or something.
Was she an actress?
Yeah, and I don't want to say too much about it.
So he was a mentor to her?
Yes, and for two hours, she sat in my car, crying, telling me her story, all of the details.
And at that moment, something changed for me.
She turned to me and she said, she wiped her face, and she said, do you believe me?
And I said, yes, I believe you.
And that was the change. And I had to look with sober eyes at what was going on.
This turn of events dramatically shifted public perception of Bill Cosby and, by extension, his body of work.
One immediate effect was the season seven episode, Last Barbecue, being pulled from syndication.
In it, Cliff brewed up special barbecue sauce that could put whoever tasted it into a sexual mood.
Haven't you ever noticed after people have some of my barbecue sauce?
After a while, when it kicks in, they get all huggy buggy.
Another challenge to experiencing the series was the knowledge that some of the actresses who appeared on the show were preyed upon by Cosby.
It introduces a complication when it comes to looking back at certain episodes,
how they can possibly be enjoyed when we know the actress we're seeing on screen has been victimized by the actor sitting next to them.
This isn't a new phenomena, of course.
Once you do know the truth, it's very hard, at least for me, to not see the real life stories in front of whatever narrative is unfolding on the screen.
A number of articles were produced reflecting on how our new public image of Bill Cosby impacted the Cosby Show.
For Salon, Chauncey DeVega wrote,
As a child of the hip-hop generation and a member of the black working class, I grew up loving the Cosby Show.
Nevertheless, I have no shame in admitting that I have much more in common with the white folks on Roseanne or the black family on rock than I ever could with the Huxtables.
And in the Chicago Tribune, reflected on the Cosby guilty verdict, Dileen Glanton wrote,
Our mistake was in trying to make Cliff and Cosby one and the same.
The most striking image of the shifting perspective of the Cosby Show came from the 2015 cover of Ebony magazine showing a shattered portrait, the fractures coming from Cosby himself.
The editor-in-chief of Ebony at the time, Kieran Omayo, wrote in 2018 on Cosby's guilty verdict as well.
Cliff Huxtable's existence wasn't as much about truth, damn right, as it was about archetypal representation.
Perhaps not enough of us in black America had seen or remembered this figure before the Cosby Show and Lord knows.
Until then, white America was virtually certain he never existed.
I know that beautiful black men like my father who do not abuse exist across generations and have through every era of American life.
Therefore, I refuse to have my passion and pride for the creative genius and iconography of the Cosby Show allow me to be the slightest bit confused.
I don't have to ride for the fallen decrepit Bill Cosby to prove what I know about black excellence, black decency, black humor, black art, black colleges, black family, black mothers, or black male heroes.
Although Bill Cosby will likely forever be viewed as a predator first, the fiction of the Bill Cosby Show may still have a lasting legacy outside of that.
Many works of art have been created by artists who have said and done reprehensible things, and we all have to decide for ourselves where we draw the line on what it means to enjoy a work of art, knowing those facts.
Reading what Mayo got from the Cosby Show reflect the power of a person's experience with a work of art.
The death of the author, written by Roland Barthes, is often cited when describing how to separate art from the artist.
In the case of Bill Cosby, his failings of a person have created a metaphorical public death of sorts, and because of that, those who wish to hold on to his creative works, such as the Cosby Show, are taking that final step of removing him entirely from the equation and creating an appreciation of the Cosby Show that is truly their own.
Before the Cosby Show, Felicia Rashad had primarily worked on stage, and at the end of the series, she would once again return to that space.
She had a number of roles on screen as well, perhaps most notably starring alongside Bill Cosby in the 1996 series, Cosby.
In 2004, she won a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for A Raisin in the Sun, making her the first black actress to ever win that award.
Following the end of the Cosby Show, Lisa Bonet went on to appear in a number of different films, such as High Fidelity and Enemy of the State.
She's also had a handful of roles on television, though she seems to have devoted much of her time to raising her three children, and in 2017, she married fellow performer Jason Momoa.
Malcolm Jamal Warner branched out in directing, having directed several episodes of the Cosby Show in its later seasons.
He still managed to continue acting as well, appearing in numerous TV shows and movies, notably starring in his own sitcom, Malcolm and Eddie.
He even released a few albums, and in 2015 won a Grammy for Best Traditional R&B Performance, along with Robert Glasper and Lala Hathaway for Jesus Children.
Tempest Bledsoe hosted a talk show briefly, titled The Tempest Bledsoe Show.
She's also performed in a number of different productions.
Since 1993, she has been in a relationship with Daryl M. Bell, who starred on A Different World.
Keisha Knight Pulliam made history in 1986, being the youngest person nominated for an Emmy at the age of six for her work on the Cosby Show.
Following the show's end, she continued acting, having found success in a number of roles, most notably as Miranda Lucas Payne on Tyler Perry's House of Pain.
Sabrina LaBeouf finds herself performing as the lead at a number of productions with the Shakespeare Theatre Company in Washington, DC.
Jeffrey Owens had a handful of roles following the Cosby Show, though none that had quite the same prominence.
In 2018, photos of Owens surfaced, showing him working at Trader Joe's, bagging groceries, which unfortunately drew a lot of negative attention, forcing him to quit.
Tyler Perry offered Owens a role in the Haves and Have Nots for ten episodes, which seems to have led to a revival of his acting career.
Joseph C. Phillips has been acting extensively since the ending of the series, notably as Justice Ward on General Hospital.
He also works as a conservative commentator.
Raven Simone went from the Cosby Show directly to another sitcom, hanging with Mr. Cooper, which ran for four years.
She was the lead in That's So Raven on the Disney Channel, during which she was nominated for a number of awards.
Following that series, she's gone on to appear in countless TV shows and movies.
She's also had a prolific singing career, releasing four studio albums.
Erika Alexander immediately moved on to a second series, Living Single, where she played the role Maxine Shaw for five seasons.
She has been working consistently ever since, with roles in a number of movies and TV shows.
Some notable recent roles for her were in the film Get Out and the CW series Black Lightning.
On June 30, 2021, Bill Cosby's conviction was overturned by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court.
They found that the testimony from the 2005 civil case used by the prosecution in the 2015 criminal case had included an agreement by the previous prosecutor that Cosby would not be criminally charged.
District Attorney Kevin Steele, who had prosecuted Cosby in 2015, said that Cosby was found guilty by a jury and now goes free on a procedural issue that is irrelevant to the facts of the crime.
Steele also expressed hope that this result will not deter future victims of sexual assault from coming forward.
To talk about the Cosby Show, I think it's important to understand the context around it.
In a sense, it may be completely unfair to put so much into understanding a single sitcom.
Other sitcoms, particularly ones with white casts, aren't expected to redefine racial politics or spark radical discourse on social justice.
But one successful show story in a black cast suddenly has that burden placed upon it.
But contrary to that, the Cosby Show wasn't just another sitcom.
It was one of the most popular sitcoms of all time, and I think it's important to ask how it got there by looking at what it did and what it didn't, and then when it got there, what it did with its new prominence.
I think an important lesson we can take away from the Cosby Show is that representation in media has a profound impact, and what a piece of media does with that representation matters as well.
Although being seen and visible has value, what is done with that visibility can take a good show and make it truly great.
This video was very tough to make.
Watching the eight seasons of the Cosby Show wasn't even the toughest part.
Collecting the research and reading all the different opinions and analyses of the show really broadened my perspective and made me appreciate a show in a way that perhaps I wouldn't have seen simply watching it on my own.
A lot of hard work went into making this video, so if you would like to see more of these in the future, please consider becoming a patron or a member for this channel, like these fine names coming up the screen now.
It's because of these people that I was able to hang on for just a little bit longer, making sure this video was as good as it can be, and I hope that came across.
In addition to supporting this channel, you'll also get early access to videos and a chance to download my theme songs.
If you'd like to support this channel in a non-monetary fashion, you can leave a comment, hit the like button, subscribe if you haven't already, or hit the bell for notifications when a new video comes out.
Thank you all so much for watching.